Understanding the Container Network Interface (CNI)


In Kubernetes, every Pod needs to communicate — with other Pods, Services, and sometimes the external world. But how does Kubernetes manage networking for thousands of Pods efficiently and consistently across nodes? This is where the Container Network Interface (CNI) comes in.


What is CNI?

CNI is a standard interface that allows Kubernetes to use any network plugin to manage container networking.

It decouples the Kubernetes networking logic from the actual implementation, meaning you can choose from multiple plugins depending on your requirements.



Some popular CNI plugins include:

        Calico – networking + network policies

        Flannel – simple overlay network

        Romana – scalable flat networking

        Weave Net – automatic network discovery

        And others

You don’t need to memorize all plugins, but it’s important to know that Kubernetes doesn’t provide a default network implementation — it relies on CNI plugins to make Pod-to-Pod communication work.





How CNI Works

* Network Plugin Installation

           Installing a CNI plugin is straightforward.

           Each plugin provides a YAML manifest (usually on their project page).

           Deploying this YAML sets up the plugin across your cluster.

* DaemonSet Deployment

           The YAML usually creates a DaemonSet.

           A DaemonSet ensures that a network agent runs on every node in the cluster.

           This agent configures the Pod network on the node and hooks into the CNI interface.



* Kubelet Configuration

            For Kubernetes to use the CNI plugin, the Kubelet must start with:

                                 --network-plugin=cni

            This tells the Kubelet to delegate Pod network setup to the CNI plugin.



Why This Matters

Without CNI, Pods wouldn’t be able to communicate with each other, breaking the cluster.

CNI ensures:

       Consistent networking across all nodes

        Flexibility to use different plugins based on features like network policies, encryption, or performance

        Scalability, even in large clusters with thousands of nodes



How Services Are Related

You’ve learned about Services in Kubernetes — they give Pods a stable IP and port.

To fully understand Services:

You need to know how Pods are networked.

Services rely on CNI and kube-proxy to route traffic to Pods correctly.

When troubleshooting networking issues, knowing how CNI works is essential.



Key Takeaways

CNI = standard interface for Kubernetes networking

Kubernetes relies on CNI plugins to connect Pods across nodes

Installing a plugin = deploy DaemonSet + supporting resources

Kubelet must use --network-plugin=cni

Without CNI, Services and Pod communication won’t work

