Understanding What a Running Pod Is

By now, we’ve created and run multiple Pods in Kubernetes. But have you ever stopped to ask yourself:

When I say a Pod is “running”, what exactly is happening on the worker node?
If the Pod has just one container, is Kubernetes really running only that single container?

The answer is: there’s more going on behind the scenes.

Example: Running a Simple Nginx Pod
kubectl run nginx --image=nginx


This creates a Deployment and a Pod with one container (Nginx).

If you log in to the worker node (via minikube ssh or gcloud compute ssh <node>), and run:

docker ps   # or crictl ps (if containerd/CRI-O is used)


You’ll notice something surprising: more than one container is running, even though your Pod spec had only one container.


Why More Than One Container?

Every Pod actually runs with some invisible helper containers managed by Kubernetes. Let’s break it down:

1. Your Main Container(s)

The container(s) you defined in the Pod spec (e.g., nginx).

2. Pause (Infrastructure) Container

A tiny container (k8s.gcr.io/pause or similar).

Its only job: hold the network namespace and IP address for the Pod.

All other containers in the Pod share this namespace.

If the pause container stops → the entire Pod stops.

3. Optional Init Containers

Run before your main app container(s).

Useful for setup tasks (like pulling configs or waiting for dependencies).

So when you say “a Pod is running”, it really means:
The pause container is up (holding the Pod’s network stack).
The main app container(s) are running as expected.
Any init containers have finished their work.


Key Insight
A Pod is not just a single container.
It’s a wrapper around:
      One or more application containers
      A special infrastructure (pause) container
      Possibly init containers

This design gives Kubernetes the power to treat a Pod as a single deployable unit, even though multiple containers may be working together inside it.

Why It Matters
Helps understand why Pods get their own IP address (thanks to pause container).
Explains why Pods are the smallest deployable unit in Kubernetes, not containers.
Clarifies how sidecars and init containers fit into the bigger picture.


Next time you deploy a Pod, remember:
It’s not “just one container running.” It’s a mini sandbox of containers working together.
